# Cosmology
<p>The shape of the Crucible (alternatively called the Wheel) Cosmos. The nature of the universe, a summary of its elements and the nature of being.</p>

<h2>Shape of the Universe</h2>

![A diagram of the Crucible Cosmos. In the center is a rust coloured basin with 8 spouts called the Crucible. Surrounding the Crucible is a circle of 8 colours. Clockwise: white with a stylized cage, red with a stylized drop of blood, orange in the shape of the sun, yellow in the shape of the alchemical symbol for arsenic stylized like an hourglass, black in the shape of a key, green in the shape of a plant sprout with two spiral leaves, blue in the shape of a stylized mirror and purple in the shape of a wrapped candy with a spiral in its center.](/Setting_Bible/images/Wheel_Diagram.png "Diagram of the Crucible Cosmos by pixelightflower")

<h3>The Wheel</h3>
<p>The Wheel Cosmos is a universe built on the Rule of Threes, the Inevitable Revolution and the idea of Duality. Most things come in sets or multiples of three, or in opposing pairs. The shape of things tends toward circles, an Inevitable Revolution. Because of this, there exists a circular series of worlds called Spokes named for how they radiate around the Wheel. These spokes are what is spoken of when the Wheel is discussed. They exist in a specific sequence placed opposite their oppositional world. Each Spoke is the realm of an Entity. These Entities are the living embodiment of some essential notion of life as we'd understand it. They are also each associated with a colour of visible light as well as white and black. (Do other Entities associated with colours outside of the human perception exist? Yes, but they represent qualities that are not relevant to a human like experience.)</p>
<h3>The Crucible</h3>
<p>In the center of the Wheel is The Crucible. The Crucible is the distillation of each of the Spokes of the Wheel into a highly ordered, physical realm that resembles the universe of the reader. Generally, Crucible is assumed to be the spherical world on which humans reside whereas The Crucible refers to the universe at the center of The Wheel. Crucible is seperated from the Wheel by fundamental natural forces of the cosmos and the span between them can only be traversed in particular, often esoteric ways. From the perspective of Crucible, The Wheel would be a fantasy story, as their night sky is full of stars and inky black void. To denizens of The Wheel, Crucible is a mysterious place from which witches come, and humans call upon the most strange terrible of their inhabitants to grant boons.</p>
<h3>Interstitial Spaces</h3>
<h4>Meta-Physical Plane, Grey Side</h4>
<p>The space between the Wheel and Crucible. It is a realm of fog, grey mists, silhoettes and shadows of the physical world. It is filled with symbolic representations of all things that possess Potentia, or, the capacity to exert agency in the realm of the physical.</p>
<h4>Plane of Possibility, Dream Side</h4>
<p>The space outside The Wheel, beyond the bounds of the entities and their realms. A surreal place of colour and chaos, wild creative energy that splashes across the firmaments of reality until all sense and reason breaks down.</p>

<h2>Elements</h2>

![A diagram of the elements of the Crucible Cosmos arranged in a circle. Clockwise: white bone dust, red blood, orange amber, yellow bile, black iron, green glass, liquid blue metal, purple tinted sugar. In the center are three more elements, salt in the shape of a perfect white cube, ovum in the shape of a black egg with an infinity symbol in its center, slime in the shape of an oozing colour wheel.](/Setting_Bible/images/Elemental_Diagram.png "Diagram of the Alchemical Elements of the Crucible Cosmos by pixelightflower")

<p>The elements of the Wheel are differentiated by the elements representing the 8 entities and the three elements that make up all living beings of the Wheel.</p>
<h3>Elements of Being, from which all other elements are derived</h3>
<ul>
  <li>Salt, Physical Being</li>
  <li>Slime, Creative Spark</li>
  <li>Ovum, Individual Potential</li>
</ul>
<h3>Elements of the 8 Spokes of The Wheel</h3>
<ul>
  <li>White Bone</li>
  <li>Red Blood</li>
  <li>Orange Amber</li>
  <li>Yellow Choler</li>
  <li>Black Iron</li>
  <li>Green Vitrum</li>
  <li>Blue Gallium</li>
  <li>Purple Sugar</li>
</ul>

<h2>Tripartite Being</h2>
<p>People are tripartite constructs consisting of Potentia, Soul Pigment and Physicality. It can be thought of as Potential, Creativity and Physical Existence. For our purposes, a person is a willful existence that is capable of change with a physical shape. There are other things that can exist in the world lacking one or more of these parts but for our purposes they are not people in the strictest sense. People stop being people when they lose any of the three parts of Being. They occupy a nebulous space of not-quite-being until they fill in the gaps or dissolve into the ether.</p>
<p>“Perception” versus “effect” is important to bring up here. For our purposes to perceive a dimension is to be able to perceive its existence and shape. Being able to effect change in that dimension is different entirely. For instance, we can perceive time but not manipulate it. We can perceive and manipulate physical dimensions within constraints. We can perceive and manipulate the Plane of Dreams only while dreaming. Prophets can perceive the Meta-Phys Plane, often disconnected from their perception of linear time, but they cannot affect it in any way.</p>

<h3>Meta-Potentia</h3>
<p>Associated with the element Ovum</p>
<p>A person’s meta-potentia is their capacity to affect the world around them. It is a connection to the meta-phys plane which is a place that is roughly a 1:1 simulacra of the physical world. The difference is in meaning and symbolism which is represented literally there. Anything that affects the physical world has an meta-potentia, a representation in the meta-phys plane or more accurately their presence in the meta-plane is evidence of their ability to affect the physical world. Without an meta-potentia of some sort a being cannot affect the world. This connection is also a force of order, an interpretation of the world as an orderly place where things happen in sequence. Potentia are metaphorically linked to their physical bodies with a silver cord, if this is cut the physical body loses that connection. The consciousness of the being is not lost, but discontinuity with the body happens immediately. They are awake in the meta-phys plane and usually drawn to The Wheel regardless of where they came from, they essentially become a Wandering Spirit. A being with a living physical body and soul pigment but no potentia is essentially comatose, a passive player in a perpetual dream. A being with soul pigment and potentia but no physical body is a wandering spirit.</p>
<p>Wandering spirits can still affect the physical world but have no physical body. Being that the physical body is what grounds a being in the here and now, lending shape to them and continuity to their actions, a wandering spirit has to work very hard to remain themself without losing track of their own being. The greatest danger is loss of self. Wandering spirits often keep mementos and objects of affection so that they can keep track of themselves and their past. Memories are associated with physical objects and beings, without a physical body memories are more difficult to keep a hold of and need physical receptacles to keep straight. Wandering Spirits are able to possess objects with no potentia of their own, and in this way avoid complete dissolution.</p>

<h3>Soul Pigments</h3>
<p>Associated with the element Slime</p>
<p>Soul Pigment is the connection of the body to the realm of dreams, in truth, it is their representation in that plane. It is the driving force of creativity without which a person is incapable of change, evolution or creative thought. It is a blob of potential dreaming, a shape that is made by the person’s outlook, desires, needs, thoughts and their way of affecting the world or being affected by it. It is the potential of change. Soul pigment, if viewed as though it were a physical thing, would be a blob of space and colour, sound and light, meaning and sequences without heed of time. All living things have soul pigment, but the extent of it differs between individuals. Anything that has the potential to change has soul pigment. This would mean that a complex learning AI with the ability to change itself would have soul pigment.</p>
<p>Soul pigments are read like auras on a Being and can say a lot about an individual as they change CONSTANTLY. Where the potentia of someone change slowly over a lifetime, soul pigments can change on a day to day, hour to hour, minute to minute basis.</p>
<p>A Being that loses pigment becomes translucent, meaningless, empty. They resemble a simple machine or automaton, performing the actions necessary to life and expected of someone in their place in the world.</p>
<p>A Being that grows closer to the Prismatica will have their Soul Pigment more consistently reflect the colour of a particular entity until it completely overtakes it.</p>

<h3>Physical Body</h3>
<p>Associated with the element Salt</p>
<p>Physical bodies reside on either on Crucible or on the Wheel. Physical bodies are subject to time, whatever that might mean, they have height, width and depth. Physical bodies usually have needs that must be met to continue functioning and some can procreate by some means. Physical bodies, and objects, are associated with memory. Any being without a physical body runs the risk of losing sight of their own history and being. A being with a powerful enough will can, in effect, replace a physical body with their own will.</p>

<h3>Death</h3>
<p>Death represents the end of the physical body, all things that are physical eventually succumb to time in some way whether they age and die or break down from wear. When a Being dies they lose all perception of the physical world. They are left with vague interpretations from their Potentia, Dream and Time. The first thing that happens is the that the Being will lose its perception of time, no longer tethered to a body in which to feel the effects of time in a very real and salient way the Being easily loses focus on time as a concept. When this happens their whole perception of reality starts to break down. They remain capable of dreams and motivations as well as their own memories. The next thing that breaks down is their memory, no longer couched in a physical receptacle memories quickly start to dissolve without constant care and attention. Then, without memory or a sense of time, the Being will do one of two things. Either the Being will disengage from the act of dreaming thus losing their pigments or they will lose motivation and only dream.</p>
<p>However, sometimes a Being can persevere. A Being that persists after death, maintaining their perception of time, Potentia and Dream all at once, can continue to persist after death as a wandering spirit. These people were often quite charismatic, strong willed, powerful practitioners of magic or some other particularly willful sort of person. They exist as a wandering spirit that can perceive the the meta-phys plane and the Plane of Dreams simultaneously, which requires some time to overcome the lure of dissolving into Dreams. Wandering Spirits move freely through the Meta-phys Plane, being drawn to the Wheel in whatever Spoke most fits their personality and life. Wandering Spirits have the unique ability to possess things or people, attaching them to the active physical potential of another’s Potentia in the process. Once they have done so, they can once again affect the world. Though, their ability to do so and to perceive that world depends on the body of course. Interestingly enough, because they aren’t bound by physical laws exactly and instead only the meaning of those laws, they can do some unusual things. For instance, they can use eyes that would otherwise be unable to see, as they remember what sight was and can approximate it regardless as long as they have a channel. Or, if they are clever and strong willed enough, they can even forgo that. Wandering spirits can use anything physical as a body if they are clever and strong willed enough. </p>
<p>There isn't a strict sort of afterlife in the Wheel Cosmos. A wandering spirit that is only pigment will be overtaken by one of their soul pigments and be absorbed into the entity that most represents them or dissolve into the Plane of Possibility. With only potentia a spirit will become a portion of the Meta-Potentia plane, a brick in the shape of the world. A spirit can possess inanimate objects in order to persist or potentially possess developing creatures that have yet to develop a sense of self. The spirit gives up their own memory in order to persist, in this case.</p>